feat: add JTC workflow guide page (#290)
aica-technology/api: docs/docs/examples/guides/05-jtc-guide.md

</div>

```yaml
frames:
  frame_1:
    reference_frame: world
    position:
      x: 0.493899
      y: 0.140303
      z: 0.429977
    orientation:
      w: -0.000563
      x: 0.707388
      y: 0.706825
      z: 0.000001
```

You may also try the inverse, that is, copy one of the above code blocks and paste it right below the `dependencies`
block replacing your recording and generate the graph. If you switch back to `3D Viz` you should see the same frame as
depicted in the above image.

#### Record joint positions

Let us also record the initial position of the robot as a joint position. Press play if you have not already, but this
time record joint positions instead of creating a frame:

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={jtcGuideRecordJoint} alt="Recording a joint in AICA Studio" />
</div>

Back in your YAML editor you will see yet another new block named `joint_positions` below your `frames`:

```yaml
joint_positions:
  jconfig_1:
    positions:
      - 0
      - 0
      - 0
      - 0
      - 0
      - 0
    joint_names:
      - joint_0
      - joint_1
      - joint_2
      - joint_3
      - joint_4
      - joint_5
```

### Building an application around JTC

> You should now have at least 2 recordings, one in Cartesian and the other in joint space. We can use these create a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should now have at least 2 recordings, one in Cartesian and the other in joint space. We can use these to create a

repetitive motion between them.

#### Loop logic

To loop the execution of the recorded frames and/or joint positions, we need a sequence block that:

1. `Sets` the trajectory by using the Cartesian frame
2. `Waits` indefinitely for the `Has trajectory succeeded` predicate to become true
3. `Sets` the trajectory by using the joint position
4. `Waits` indefinitely for the `Has trajectory succeeded` predicate to become true
5. `Auto-loops` the sequence by enabling the corresponding toggle on the sequence block

Take a moment and try to create this sequence.

:::tip

> Your sequence block needs to be started after JTC has been activated, otherwise your service call will fail. Try to

Reviewer: ```suggestion 
Your sequence block needs to be started after JTC has been activated, otherwise your service call will fail. Try

---
sidebar_position: 5
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

import jtcGuideHW from './assets/jtc-guide-hw.png'
import jtcGuideParameters from './assets/jtc-guide-parameters.png'
import jtcGuideRecordFrame from './assets/jtc-guide-record-frame.gif'
import jtcGuideCreateFrame from './assets/jtc-guide-create-frame.gif'
import jtcGuideRecordJoint from './assets/jtc-guide-record-joint.gif'

# A guide on Joint Trajectory workflows

In our concepts page for the [Joint Trajectory Controller](../../concepts/05-building-blocks/04-controllers/jtc.md)

> (JTC) we already covered why trajectory controllers are oftentimes needed in robotics. Feel free to refer to the linked
> page. In short, executing trajectories, in joint- or Cartesian-space, is quite often a fundamental piece of a robotics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(JTC) we already covered why trajectory controllers are oftentimes needed in robotics. In short, executing trajectories, in joint- or Cartesian-space, is quite often a fundamental piece of a robotics
```

> page. In short, executing trajectories, in joint- or Cartesian-space, is quite often a fundamental piece of a robotics

Reviewer 2: quite often and oftentimes

> application workflow. Whether you need to address pick n' place tasks, or to simply move through predetermined locations,

Reviewer 2: Would prefer pick & place or pick and place

you are in need of a controller that is able to traverse space accurately and timely.

While in TODO: we covered a basic example of how JTC can be used, here we will focus more on its integration with AICA
Studio and suggest workflows and/or parametrizations that might aid you when building big applications.

## Setting up your environment

JTC has a plethora of parameters that can be set to alter its performance according to an application's requirements.
Let us start by creating a new application that we can use as a reference point for this guide.

> First, start AICA Launcher and create a configuration with at least `AICA Core v4.4.0` (TODO: joint positions). For the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, start AICA Launcher and create a configuration with at least `AICA Core v4.4.1` (TODO: joint positions). For the
```
What is the todo related to?

Author: oh, yeah I wrote the guide before the latest release, so joint positions was not there in the front end (for recording)

trajectory. However, there are cases, e.g., when you are controlling in velocities, where you want to allow non-zero
values even if the trajectory waypoints have been successfully traversed.
- `Proportional/Integral/Derivative gain(s)`: these gains are to be set and tuned when you are, for example, commanding
in velocity but your trajectory has positions. Then, a PID control will be applied to generate desired velocities
through the trajectory.

You will also notice tolerance values for trajectory execution times and position offsets. These should be set on a
per-application basis.

You may find advanced parameters in the `Docs` tab under the `Joint Trajectory Controller` page. These parameters can be
used to further tune JTC's performance and functionality, but may also require more advanced knowledge in order to tune
them. Make sure to carefully read the descriptions next to each parameter before making changes.

### Setting a trajectory for execution

There are 2 ways of setting a trajectory in JTC:

1. by using a `JointTrajectory` signal
2. by calling the `set_trajectory` service

> In both cases, receiving a new joint trajectory will first trigger cancellation of the active (if any) trajectory. That

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In both cases, receiving a new joint trajectory will first trigger cancellation of an active trajectory, if there is one. That
```

is, **there is no trajectory buffering or appending taking place**. As with many things in the AICA Universe, behaviors
are event-driven. If you wish to send multiple trajectories back-to-back, you will have to rely on the execution status
of the active trajectory handled by JTC. There is a practical example of how do this in following sections
(see [Putting an application together](#putting-an-application-together)). 

#### Using JTC with signals

In practice, this requires publishing a single
[`JointTrajectory`](https://docs.ros.org/en/noetic/api/trajectory_msgs/html/msg/JointTrajectory.html) message. In AICA
Studio terms, that means connecting an edge from a custom component directly to the input of JTC. If you already have a
component that has the corresponding signal output, feel free to skip the next segment.

If you are writing the signal logic yourself, the following code indicates what your message-related code may look like:

<Tabs groupId="programming-language">
<TabItem value="python" label="Python">

> ```python title="py_component.py"

Reviewer 2: Nice, is that tested?

Author: a few correction, it's now good and tested

this->trajectory_->points[1].positions = {0.2, 0.4, 0.8, -0.2, 0.1, 0.3};
this->trajectory_->points[1].velocities = {0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0};
this->trajectory_->points[1].time_from_start = rclcpp::Duration::from_seconds(4);

this->publish_output("trajectory");
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

:::tip
The joint names need to correspond to the joint names from your robot description (*i.e.*, URDF). If you are **not**
using the `Generic six-axis robot arm`, you will need to adjust these names.

The easiest way to do so if you do not already know them is to head to the `Hardware` menu of your AICA Launcher and
read through your URDF.
:::

#### Using JTC's `Set Trajectory` service

The service currently accepts 5 variables, namely:

- `times_from_start`: a list of timestamps (in seconds) measured from the start, indicating when JTC should reach each
frame.
- `frames`: names of the Cartesian frames to reach with the robot end effector 
- `joint_positions`: names of joint positions that the robot should achieve
- `blending_factors`: factors in [0.0, 1.0] indicating the amount of curving allowed between 2 consecutive waypoints.

> The first and last segment are currently not considered in blending, therefore, the vector's size needs to be equal to

Reviewer 2: Do we already have an issue to improve that?

Author: Yes, we would be allowing blending for the first waypoint (never the last)

and toggle on `Show frames`, as this will provide a visual reference about the orientation of the end effector. For
example:

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={jtcGuideCreateFrame} alt="Creating a frame in AICA Studio" />
</div>

Open your YAML editor and notice that there is now a `frames` section with your recorded frame, for example:

```yaml
frames:
  frame_1:
    reference_frame: world
    position:
      x: 0.468317
      y: -0.116919
      z: 0.422861
    orientation:
      w: 0.057171
      x: 0.64853
      y: 0.75827
      z: 0.034142
```

#### Record a frame: Create a frame from an existing one 

Alternatively, you can record a frame directly on the robot's end effector and then proceed to move it (in which case
the orientation is copied from the end effector), as shown below:

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={jtcGuideRecordFrame} alt="Recording a frame in AICA Studio" />
</div>

```yaml
frames:
  frame_1:
    reference_frame: world
    position:
      x: 0.493899
      y: 0.140303
      z: 0.429977
    orientation:
      w: -0.000563
      x: 0.707388
      y: 0.706825
      z: 0.000001
```

> You may also try the inverse, that is, copy one of the above code blocks and paste it right below the `dependencies`

Reviewer 2: Find that quite specific, you can technically add it anywhere

Author: true, but I do want to guide them enough to not paste it under components or something. We could go "Paste it anywhere in the outermost scope" but I don't know if that's also very user-friendly

Reviewer 2: fair point, yet `below the dependencies` is about as user friendly as "top level" because the same error could happen in any case

Author: yup, fair enough. I'll try to rephrase a bit there

---
sidebar_position: 5
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

import jtcGuideHW from './assets/jtc-guide-hw.png'
import jtcGuideParameters from './assets/jtc-guide-parameters.png'
import jtcGuideRecordFrame from './assets/jtc-guide-record-frame.gif'
import jtcGuideCreateFrame from './assets/jtc-guide-create-frame.gif'
import jtcGuideRecordJoint from './assets/jtc-guide-record-joint.gif'

# A guide on Joint Trajectory workflows

In our concepts page for the [Joint Trajectory Controller](../../concepts/05-building-blocks/04-controllers/jtc.md)
(JTC) we already covered why trajectory controllers are quite often needed in robotics. In short, executing trajectories,

> in joint- or Cartesian-space, is quite often a fundamental piece of a robotics application workflow. Whether you need to

Author: nah, you are right, that's leftover from a previous phrase

address pick and place tasks, or to simply move through predetermined locations, you are in need of a controller that is
able to traverse space accurately and timely.

While in ["A joint trajectory execution example"](./04-jtc-example.md) we covered a basic example of how JTC can be
used, here we will focus more on its integration with AICA Studio and suggest workflows and/or parametrizations that
might aid you when building big applications.

## Setting up your environment

JTC has a plethora of parameters that can be set to alter its performance according to an application's requirements.
Let us start by creating a new application that we can use as a reference point for this guide.

> First, start AICA Launcher and create a configuration with at least `AICA Core v4.4.1`. For the remainder of this guide,

Reviewer 2: Is that really a code block, don't we want to say "a configuration with AICA Core version 4.4.1 or higher"?

velocity, acceleration, or effort.
- `State interfaces`: the type of state interfaces JTC will claim. Some interfaces may be necessary depending on your
choice of command interfaces. For example, if you want to control your robot in acceleration, you need to have a
velocity state interface. 
- `Open loop control`: refers to whether the controller will be correcting its desired commands according to the state
it is receiving or not.
- `Allow nonzero velocity at trajectory end`: typically, you want the robot to halt when it reaches the end of your
trajectory. However, there are cases, e.g., when you are controlling in velocities, where you want to allow non-zero
values even if the trajectory waypoints have been successfully traversed.
- `Proportional/Integral/Derivative gain(s)`: these gains are to be set and tuned when you are, for example, commanding
in velocity but your trajectory has positions. Then, a PID control will be applied to generate desired velocities
through the trajectory.

You will also notice tolerance values for trajectory execution times and position offsets. These should be set on a

> per-application basis.

Author: I don't know if I would go into detail for each of those (I feel our controller descriptions are quite detailed), but mentioning the rest of the predicates is missing

it is receiving or not.
- `Allow nonzero velocity at trajectory end`: typically, you want the robot to halt when it reaches the end of your
trajectory. However, there are cases, e.g., when you are controlling in velocities, where you want to allow non-zero
values even if the trajectory waypoints have been successfully traversed.
- `Proportional/Integral/Derivative gain(s)`: these gains are to be set and tuned when you are, for example, commanding
in velocity but your trajectory has positions. Then, a PID control will be applied to generate desired velocities
through the trajectory.

You will also notice tolerance values for trajectory execution times and position offsets. These should be set on a
per-application basis, as failing to satisfy the corresponding constraints would lead to the trajectory failing
mid-execution.

You may find advanced parameters in the `Docs` tab under the `Joint Trajectory Controller` page. These parameters can be
used to further tune JTC's performance and functionality, but may also require more advanced knowledge in order to tune
them. Make sure to carefully read the descriptions next to each parameter before making changes.

> ### Setting a trajectory for execution

Reviewer 3: I would suggest to move this heading up one level
```suggestion
## Setting a trajectory for execution
```

Then correspondingly, "Using JTC with signals" and "Using JTC's `Set Trajectory` service" should be three ### and not four

There are 2 ways of setting a trajectory in JTC:

1. by using a `JointTrajectory` signal
2. by calling the `set_trajectory` service

In both cases, receiving a new joint trajectory will first trigger cancellation of an active trajectory, if there is

> one. That is, **there is no trajectory buffering or appending taking place**. As with many things in the AICA Universe,

Reviewer 3: > As with many things in the AICA Universe

I like this 😁

behaviors are event-driven. If you wish to send multiple trajectories back-to-back, you will have to rely on the
execution status of the active trajectory handled by JTC. There is a practical example of how do this in following
sections (see [Putting an application together](#putting-an-application-together)). 

### Trajectory execution status

The controller exposes 4 predicates to reflect the the execution status of a trajectory, namely:

- `Has active trajectory`: A trajectory has been set and is being executed
- `Has trajectory succeeded`: A trajectory was executed successfully (i.e., reached the final waypoint respecting all 

> tolerances in the way)

Reviewer 3: This sentence is a bit weird, maybe:
```suggestion
tolerances on the way)
```

Or just "reached the final waypoint within all tolerances"

import rclpy
from trajectory_msgs.msg import JointTrajectory, JointTrajectoryPoint

# Typically in your constructor
self._trajectory = JointTrajectory()
self.add_output("trajectory", "_trajectory", JointTrajectory, publish_on_step=False)

# Typically in a conditional block that will write the output upon the success of some criteria
self._trajectory.header.stamp = self.get_clock().now().to_msg()
self._trajectory.joint_names = ['joint_0', 'joint_1', 'joint_2', 'joint_3', 'joint_4', 'joint_5']

p1 = JointTrajectoryPoint()
p1.positions = [0.6, 0.2, 0.0, 0.0, -0.2, 0.0]
p1.velocities = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
p1.time_from_start = rclpy.time.Duration(seconds=2.0).to_msg()

p2 = JointTrajectoryPoint()
p2.positions = [-0.6, -0.2, 0.0, 0.0, 0.2, 0.0]
p2.velocities = [0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
p2.time_from_start = rclpy.time.Duration(seconds=4.0).to_msg()

self._trajectory.points = [p1, p2]

self.publish_output("trajectory")
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="c++" label="C++">

```cpp title="include/custom_component_package/CppComponent.hpp"
#pragma once

#include <trajectory_msgs/msg/joint_trajectory.hpp>
#include <trajectory_msgs/msg/joint_trajectory_point.hpp>

> // ... 

Reviewer 3: probably meant to finish a relevant comment here about declaring the class data member

std::shared_ptr<trajectory_msgs::msg::JointTrajectory> trajectory_;
```

```cpp title="src/CppComponent.cpp"
#include "custom_component_package/CppComponent.hpp"

// Typically in your constructor
this->trajectory_ = std::make_shared<trajectory_msgs::msg::JointTrajectory>();
this->add_output("trajectory", this->trajectory_, "", false, false);

// Typically in a conditional block that will write the output upon the success of some criteria
this->trajectory_->header.stamp = this->get_node()->get_clock()->now();
this->trajectory_->joint_names = {"joint_0", "joint_1", "joint_2", "joint_3", "joint_4", "joint_5"};
this->trajectory_->points.resize(2);

this->trajectory_->points[0].positions = {0.6, 0.2, 0.0, 0.0, -0.2, 0.0};
this->trajectory_->points[0].velocities = {0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0};
this->trajectory_->points[0].time_from_start = rclcpp::Duration::from_seconds(2.0);

this->trajectory_->points[1].positions = {-0.6, -0.2, 0.0, 0.0, 0.2, 0.0};
this->trajectory_->points[1].velocities = {0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 0.0};
this->trajectory_->points[1].time_from_start = rclcpp::Duration::from_seconds(4.0);

this->publish_output("trajectory");
```
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> :::tip

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:::note
```

read through your URDF.
:::

#### Using JTC's `Set Trajectory` service

The service currently accepts 5 variables, namely:

- `times_from_start`: a list of timestamps (in seconds) measured from the start, indicating when JTC should reach each
frame.
- `frames`: names of the Cartesian frames to reach with the robot end effector 
- `joint_positions`: names of joint positions that the robot should achieve
- `blending_factors`: factors in [0.0, 1.0] indicating the amount of curving allowed between 2 consecutive waypoints.
The first and last segment are currently not considered in blending, therefore, the vector's size needs to be equal to
the number of frames or joint positions **minus** 2. **The default blending factors are all set to 0.0.**
- `blending_samples`: the number of samples **(minimum 10; default 50)** to be used when generating the blended
trajectory. If you find that your blended trajectory is not smooth enough, consider increasing this number.

While `times_from_start` is always required, only one of `frames` and `joint_positions` can be used at a time. The

> former, is a vector of Cartesian frames from which an Inverse Kinematics (IK) solver will compute the joint positions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
former is a vector of Cartesian frames from which an Inverse Kinematics (IK) solver will compute the joint positions
```

</div>

Open your YAML editor and notice that there is now a `frames` section with your recorded frame, for example:

```yaml
frames:
  frame_1:
    reference_frame: world
    position:
      x: 0.468317
      y: -0.116919
      z: 0.422861
    orientation:
      w: 0.057171
      x: 0.64853
      y: 0.75827
      z: 0.034142
```

#### Record a frame: Create a frame from an existing one 

Alternatively, you can record a frame directly on the robot's end effector and then proceed to move it (in which case
the orientation is copied from the end effector), as shown below:

<div class="text--center">
  <img src={jtcGuideRecordFrame} alt="Recording a frame in AICA Studio" />
</div>

```yaml
frames:
  frame_1:
    reference_frame: world
    position:
      x: 0.493899
      y: 0.140303
      z: 0.429977
    orientation:
      w: -0.000563
      x: 0.707388
      y: 0.706825
      z: 0.000001
```

You may also try the inverse, that is, copy one of the above code blocks and paste it at the top-level scope of your 
YAML application (similar to `dependencies`, `components`, `controllers`, ...) block replacing your recording and 

> generate the graph. If you switch back to `3D Viz` you should see the same frame as depicted in the above image.

Reviewer 3: Here "block replacing your recording" feels a bit weird to me. I would rather just say "paste it at the top-level scope of your YAML application and generate the graph"
